First draft of ADR on ComponentReferences (#113)
redhat-appstudio/book: ADR/00xx-component-references.md

* When [integration-service] notices a build of a Component that references no other components and no other components refer to it - then it proceeds like normal, runs tests, promotes, deploys, releases, etc.

### Build-service

* [build-service] will propagate the digest from one Component to another as a PR – following the declared `ComponentReferences`. This is a bit like renovatebot wrapped in a controller. The [build-service] acts when it sees that a build pipelinerun has completed successfully for a *referent* image.
  * If this is the first time it has seen this *referent* updated in this way, it will file a new pull request on the *referer* supplying the pullspec and digest of the new referent, using the same branch name as was used for the *referent* PR.
  * If a PR on that branch already exists, update that branch with an additional commit including the new *referent* digest.

The [build-service] will also update the PR it filed when the PRs that triggered it are merged or updated. It may update the description and/or it may rebase on the main branch and/or it may issue /retest. Need to figure out what we want here.

### “PR dependency”

> TODO - describe exactly how the user specifies that one PR depends on another. PaC will have to pass this through to the PipelineRun as an annotation. For now, just assume it is possible and defined.

Author: TODO

Author: One idea:

* Indicate this with some special syntax in PR description: `Depends on: other/repo#123`
* Indicate this with some special comment with a syntax that PaC recognizes: `/depends-on other/repo#123`
* Indicate this by sharing branch names. If the two PRs share the same origin branch name (and same fork owner/organization) then they should be understood to be related. But, which one depends on which?

Reviewer: Do all of these options depend on changes to PaC? If we are not proposing the addition of any dependency abstraction to PaC, then I am not sure we will be able to leverage it for making these links.

Author: Ack - yes, I think they all depend on PaC passing some new information along on the PipelineRuns it creates.

(I guess, the origin branch name could already be present - passed along by PaC. The other two would surely be new.)

Author: Today, I pushed 63dbb7c, updating this to use a *prefix* of the **source branch name** as a "PR Group" identifier.

I think this can work and it will require only low-complexity changes in PaC (all that needs to change is to start passing along the source branch name as an annotation to the PipelineRun).

# XX. Component References

* Date 2023-06-xx

## Status

Proposed

## Context

> As an RHTAP user, I want to specify relationships between my components as image digests and I want that to be easy.

There are three use cases in scope for this document:

> * A user team has their own **intermediate base image**. When they propose an update to their base image with new content, they want to see if that’s going to break any of their dozen Components that depend on it before merging. RHTAP should posit what rebuilds of those Components will look like and if they will pass their tests, and report that feedback back to the original pull request that updated content of the intermediate base image ([RHTAP-967](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHTAP-967)). A real example of this is in stolostron, where a [layered image component](https://github.com/stolostron/console/blob/main/Dockerfile.mce.prow#L20) refers to a [common parent image](https://github.com/stolostron/common-nodejs-parent). The reference is not by digest today, presumably because it is too hard to maintain the reference by image digest.

Author: Resolved in d14172c.

> * A user team has their own **intermediate base image**. When they propose an update to their base image with new content, they want to see if that’s going to break any of their dozen Components that depend on it before merging. RHTAP should posit what rebuilds of those Components will look like and if they will pass their tests, and report that feedback back to the original pull request that updated content of the intermediate base image ([RHTAP-967](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHTAP-967)). A real example of this is in stolostron, where a [layered image component](https://github.com/stolostron/console/blob/main/Dockerfile.mce.prow#L20) refers to a [common parent image](https://github.com/stolostron/common-nodejs-parent). The reference is not by digest today, presumably because it is too hard to maintain the reference by image digest.

Author: Updated in bf68dc4.

  * In this case, the app images must be rebuilt for the intermediate image update to really be evaluated in a functional way.
  * This is a many-to-one dependency. Many component images depend on one intermediate base image.

> * A user team has an **OLM operator**. When they propose an update to one of their operands with new code, they want to see if that’s going to break their operator. RHTAP should posit what a rebuild of the operator bundle will look like and if it passes its tests and report that feedback back to the original pull request that updated the code in one of the operand images ([RHTAP-992](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHTAP-992)). A real example of this is in [gatekeeper](https://github.com/gatekeeper/gatekeeper-operator) where the operator repo contains both the [controller code](https://github.com/gatekeeper/gatekeeper-operator/blob/main/controllers/gatekeeper_controller.go) and the [bundle metadata](https://github.com/gatekeeper/gatekeeper-operator/blob/main/config/manifests/bases/gatekeeper-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml), which need to be built into separate images([1](https://github.com/gatekeeper/gatekeeper-operator/blob/main/Dockerfile) and [2](https://github.com/gatekeeper/gatekeeper-operator/blob/main/bundle.Dockerfile)), separate Components in RHTAP.

Author: Revised in 8cbe404.

>   * In this case, the bundle image must be rebuilt for the operand image update to be really be evaluated in a functional way.

Author: ```suggestion
  * In this case, the bundle image must be rebuilt for the operand image update to be tested at all (assuming OLM is the strategy for deploying the operator).
```

  * This is a one-to-many dependency. One operator bundle depends on many operand images.

> * A user team just has **two components that depend on each other in a functional way**. When they propose an update to one component, they want to submit a corresponding change to the second component, and have those tested together before merging both.

Author: Oh, I guess we could drop this one. We don't really elaborate on it further in the doc.

It was meant to be a kind of "most generic" case: Users might have (1) a parent/child relationship, (2) a operand/bundle relationship, or (3) some custom reference thing we've never heard of. The "some functional way" here was meant to be that (3) wildcard option.

>   * In this case, on any given day, component B’s PRs may or may not have dependencies on PRs from component A. Not all changes are linked.

Author: That's right - it is relevant for the other use cases. They can end up being combined!

>   * This is a many-to-many dependency. The user may have lots of components that depend on lots of other components.

Author: Dropped in 25b8a69

> In theory **any combination of the cases above** could be present in an app. They could have one intermediate base image, many operand images that depend on that, and one or more operator bundles which depend on those.

Author: That they can be chained together. ODH had an example for us. They had base images, on which were built jupyter notebook images, and those were referenced from an operator bundle (by tag, but ideally by digest).

> Today, users work around how complicated it is to manage digests themselves by instead using *floating tags*, which have the benefit of being easy to use - no need to update - but have the problem of being unclear. It's not exactly clear what you're building against if you refer to it by tag. Potentially insecure. We want to make it easy for users to do better.

Author: Yeah - I guess it is a complication on the problem. There is a core problem of when to trigger rebuilds and how to test things together - but, it is even more onerous to manage manually if you have to copy and paste digests around in git as a part of that trigger/test cycle.

## Decision

### API

> * Introduce a new CustomResource called `ComponentReference` that lets one Component declare that another Component **embeds a reference** to it.

Reviewer: How will users be able to provide the data to AppStudio to fill in the required metadata for a ComponentReference? This won't happen with a PR itself -- that is a separate use case. Will this happen within the Tekton specification? Within the AppStudio UI? Directly with CRs?

Author: * :x: Will this happen within the Tekton specification?
* :heavy_check_mark: Within the AppStudio UI?
* :heavy_check_mark: Directly with CRs?

>   * A `ComponentReference` spec contains two fields: a referent, and a referer

Reviewer: I tried out both of my suggested forms in the rest of the comments. Embedded and embedding was easier for me to use.

>   * A `ComponentReference` spec contains two fields: a referent, and a referer

Author: Let's give it a try.

>   * A `ComponentReference` spec contains two fields: a referent, and a referer

Author: Updated in 1caf434.

  * [integration-service] handles the testing and promotion of all referents in a special way.
  * A new set of functionality for [build-service] uses the `ComponentReference` links to propose updates to users git repositories.

> * Introduce a new convention for PRs that lets one PR declare that it depends on another PR.

Reviewer 2: I too, found that the mixture of `ComponentReferences` and PR dependencies in the API section a tad confusing.  
Maybe separate sections in **API** that highlights that they are different beasts.

* Important to understand: the declared reference embeddings as defined in the `ComponentReferences` and PR dependencies are two different things.
  * `ComponentReferences` are declarations about which Components we should expect to see PR dependencies for.
    * You say in english: “Component A references Component B.”
  * PR dependencies can be supplied by the user without any declared `ComponentReferences` on the respective Components.
    * You say in english: “PR #1 depends on PR #2.”

### Integration-service

> * When [integration-service] notices a build of a *referent* Component (where another Component declares that it embeds a reference to this one), it always skips all testing (both pre-merge and post-merge). It always promotes the image to the global candidate list when the PR is merged, but it does not promote to dev environment (post-merge) and it does not create Releases (post-merge).

Author: Only on push ("when the PR is merged")

* When [integration-service] notices a build of a *referer* Component (one that declares that it embeds references to others), it does testing as normal, promotes to global candidate list as normal, and it promotes to dev env as normal, and it creates Releases as normal.
* When [integration-service] notices a build of a Component that references no other components and no other components refer to it - then it proceeds like normal, runs tests, promotes, deploys, releases, etc.

### Build-service

> * [build-service] will propagate the digest from one Component to another as a PR – following the declared `ComponentReferences`. This is a bit like renovatebot wrapped in a controller. The [build-service] acts when it sees that a build pipelinerun has completed successfully for a *referent* image.

Reviewer 2: what are the mechanics for **propagate the digest from one Component to another as a PR**?

Author: It looks like a recursive `sed` invocation in the repo, submitting as a pull request. Replace all instance of the old digest with the new digest.

Reviewer 2: How does the Build Service know what the old digest is? Via the Component CR?

* [build-service] will propagate the digest from one Component to another as a PR – following the declared `ComponentReferences`. This is a bit like renovatebot wrapped in a controller. The [build-service] acts when it sees that a build pipelinerun has completed successfully for a *referent* image.
  * If this is the first time it has seen this *referent* updated in this way, it will file a new pull request on the *referer* supplying the pullspec and digest of the new referent, using the same branch name as was used for the *referent* PR.
  * If a PR on that branch already exists, update that branch with an additional commit including the new *referent* digest.

The [build-service] will also update the PR it filed when the PRs that triggered it are merged or updated. It may update the description and/or it may rebase on the main branch and/or it may issue /retest. Need to figure out what we want here.

### “PR dependency”

TODO - describe exactly how the user specifies that one PR depends on another. PaC will have to pass this through to the PipelineRun as an annotation. For now, just assume it is possible and defined.

> * When [integration-service] notices a build from a PR (PR#2) that declares it depends on another PR (PR#1), it will do testing but it will also:

Reviewer: What do you mean by "it will do testing"? Earlier, it sounded like you were saying that all testing would be skipped for the rebuilds of embedded reference.

Reviewer: > When integration-service sees a build of B it **will perform testing on a Snapshot for** B as normal.

You only mention a combined snapshot with PR dependencies. While it might not be _strictly_ necessary to have a combined snapshot for only `ComponentRefernce` dependencies (the images should still be accessible for deployment regardless of what is in the snapshot and therefore deployed), should the Snapshot in this instance be merged as well for consistency?

Author: Hm, in the situation where you have a `ComponentReference` but you do not have a PR Dependency, then I don't think that we have enough information on hand in order to construct a merged `Snapshot`.

Note that the following should be modified to include an extra sentence on the end:

> When integration-service sees a build of A it will not perform testing on a Snapshot for A because it knows that (in order to be meaningful) it will need a Snapshot containing a new build of B. It will promote the post-merge build of A to the global candidate list even though it did not perform testing.

This ensures that, later:

> When integration-service sees a build of B it will perform testing on a Snapshot for B as normal.

.. that the Snapshot created for B can include the content from "A" which was promoted to the global candidate list. Normal behavior for integration-service is to construct Snapshots from 1) the component build that triggered it plus 2) the current contents of the global candidate list for all other components.

Reviewer: With `ComponentReferences`, it is not possible to test dependencies without introducing changes to other components with PRs. Therefore, does a `ComponentReference` not trigger a PR dependency? When the former is acted upon, there is a PR opened for the user on the embedding component and the two will be dependent upon each other.

Author: Yeah, I think that's right. When you have a declared `ComponentReference` in place, then if you submit a PR on a _referent_, build-service should submit a PR with the digest reference update to the repository of the referer *and it should declare a PR dependency between its PR and your triggering PR*.

  * Construct the Snapshot for the test using the image from the triggering build pipeline of PR #2 as well as image found on the latest build pipeline associated with PR#1. This lets a user test PR #2 including unmerged content from PR #1.
  * Post the test results back on PR#1 in addition to the results it would normally post to PR#2.
  * Post a special followup check result on PR#2 that “fails” saying, “don’t merge this. It still depends on another.”

> * When [integration-service] notices a build from a PR that declares it depends on another PR but that other PR is merged, it will do testing and it will post a followup check result that “succeeds” saying “this is mergeable, all other PRs that it depends on are merged.”

Reviewer: When is this noticing done? Is it triggered on a push event -- detecting what PRs might have been blocked by a dependent PR merge, updating those depending PRs once they are merged?

What is the testing that is done here? If images are reused then is there any testing that is actually perfomred?

Author: ```suggestion
* When [integration-service] notices that a PR has merged (by observing a PipelineRun for a push event), it will do testing. It will find all other open PRs that declare that they depended on the PR that just merged and it will post a followup check result that “succeeds” saying “this is mergeable, all other PRs that it depends on are merged.”
```

Author: Is that helpful?

Reviewer: What does this mean?

> it will do testing

The push event build will be tested? The dependent PR will be tested? Integration service will test to see if there are other PRs open?

The PRs might need to be updated anyway for the new images that have been produced.

Author: We need to name the PRs 1 and 2 or A and B. This is getting confusing.

> When two PRs (for Component C and D respectively) have a PR Dependency between them (saying that the PR-on-D depends on the PR-on-C), then:
>
>    When integration-service sees a build stemming from the PR-on-C, it will execute testing of a snapshot containing the content from PR-on-C as normal.
>    When it sees a build stemming from PR-on-D, it will execute testing of a snapshot containing the content from PR-on-D and PR-on-C.

In this case, we have PR-on-D and PR-on-C.

I think I was originally writing that

* Imagine PR-on-C has already merged and [integration-service] sees a build from PR-on-D. It should just do stuff as normal, because PR-on-C should already be in the global candidate list. integration-service doesn't need to mark PR-on-D as "don't merge".

However, the more interesting case (not yet described) is this one:

* Imagine PR-on-C has not yet merged. [integration-service] sees a build from PR-on-D. It follows new PR dependency rules and tests the two together.
* Then, later, PR-on-C merges!! [integration-service] needs to respond to the build for PR-on-C's merge and it needs to update the github checks status for PR-on-D to say "okay to merge now".

Reviewer: Ack. The not yet described case does sound more interesting than the originally intended case.

> This is getting confusing.

At least I think that there is more confusion in the verbal explanation than in the implementation.

> * When [integration-service] notices a build from a PR that declares it depends on another PR but that other PR is merged, it will do testing and it will post a followup check result that “succeeds” saying “this is mergeable, all other PRs that it depends on are merged.”

Reviewer: What would the flow be if PR#1 is closed? Or if you have two components which are dependent and the originating PR is closed?

Author: Ack - need to describe more of those edge cases.

Author: Added in a944c44.

>   * If PR #2 depends on two or more other PRs (not just 1), then [integration-service] should perform testing and post *distinct* followup check results on PR#2 reporting the merge status of all PRs it depends on. As they merge, those distinct check results turn from failing to passing. When all have passed, then PR#2 will appear as mergeable to the user.

Reviewer: Imagine a situation where there are multiple PRs open on an embedded component's repository. There would have to be enough granularity present to open and track multiple distinct PRs on the embedding component's repository.

>   * If PR #1 is closed without merging, then PR #2 could languish. [build-service] should check this for this situation on a periodic basis (for want of an event to trigger it) and either update or close PR #2.

Reviewer: Is this reasonable to dismiss as an implementation detail for the build-service?

Author: I ended up dropping this section.

## Applied to Use Cases

Let's apply the architecture to some use cases, and see how it plays out:

### Common Parent Image

Scenario: an application image depends on a common parent image. The user has 1 Application, and 2 Components. One of them is the parent image. The other image is built FROM that image.

* The app image Component declares that it embeds a reference to the parent image Component, by way of a new `ComponentReference` CR.
* [integration-service] will always skip testing for parent image update builds, will never promote them, or use them to initiate Releases, but it will promote them to the global candidate list.

> * [build-service] will propagate digest references as a PR to the app image Component repo, by analyzing the available `ComponentReference` CRs in the workspace.

Reviewer 3: On pull request in common parent image:
1. Pipelines-as-code will build common parent image
2. build-service will detect that ComponentReference exists and creates pull-request in app repo with the updated digest and Do not merge labels
The Pull-request in app repo should never be merged but used for evaluation of base image update. It should be closed when the base image pull request is Closed/Merged.

On push in common parent image:
1. Pipelines-as-code will build common parent image
2. Build-service will create pull-request in app repository
3. This pull-request is processed in standard way -> tested and merged by user.

That's how it could work. I do not get next line where that pull-request "don't merge this" is created by integration service.

Is this expecting that when the pull-request is merged that we re-use the image built by pull-request pipeline? That's not currently happening. Even the images from Pull-requests are scratched build and being deleted in 5 days based on [STONEBLD-1123](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/STONEBLD-1123)

Author: I thought that we had the ability to re-use an image from a PR if it was built from the same commit id as a (later) push event to main. This would only work in certain merge strategies and if the PR was already rebased on main.

But - if this is not already the case, we can drop this from the operator design here. It is not essential. I was just building on top of a concept that I thought we already had in place.

We may want to bring that functionality _in_ as part of future changes if it is really absent today; but again, not critical to this operator story. The flow you describe above makes sense to me.

    * 🤔 Submit its commits as a suggestion on the original PR, which the user can accept or not.
      * This would be “odd” for build service, but maybe nice from the user’s point of view. Just one PR to work with.
    * ❌ Push its commits with the new image digest references to a new feature branch based on the original feature branch, called `new-feature-build-service`
      * This could be nice, but the PR will trigger new builds of the original image since it contains code changes for the controller (here, I am assuming that we can limit builds in PaC based on contextDirectories for multi-Component repos; we don’t have this today, but assume that we do).
    * ✅ Push its commits with the new image digest references to a new feature branch that is not based on the original feature branch, called `new-feature-from-build-service`
      * This works like it does in most other cases. Let the user merge the original PR, and only after that will [integration-service] update the checks for `new-feature-from-build-service` to say “okay to merge now!”

## Open Questions

* To give the user some control, should we make [build-service] respect [renovatebot

>   configuration files](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/)? Does that still make

Reviewer: Is it possible to respect all but some subset of renovatebot configurations? If this functionality is enabled, it wouldn't make sense to limit the frequency of updates, for example.

Author: Or, would respecting some-but-not-all configuration be even more confusing for users?

Reviewer: I don't know how the configuration of renovatebot might look. Would it be possible to separate the configuration for AppStudio as a whole vs. ComponentReferences specifically? If it is possible for users to customize it then they might want to in order to enable quick propagation of these changes while reducing overall PR volume from build pipeline updates.

Author: Yeah, it exists as a file in the user's repo: https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/

We could ask the user to put one file in place for "normal" renovatebot control, and a second file with a different name but the same schema (or a subset of the normal schema) to control ComponentReference behavior. Say, `.renovaterc.json` and `.references.json`.

Author: But - I don't have a concrete thing yet that I can imagine the user would want to control. We should analyze the options and introduce this only if we know of a thing a user would actually want to use it for.

Reviewer: I think I am agreeing with where you are at -- the default case would be to not respect the configurations. If requested, a separate configuration file can be respected.

  sense if renovatebot is not being run on a cron basis? (If the answer to the original question is
  yes, then that may inform whether how we implement the new functionality in [build-service].
* Since we don't have exclusive control over merging changes (or really, any control at all
  exclusive or not), we can't prevent the user from merging things out of order. This means they can
  get themselves into trouble. We try to provide feedback via github checks to help prevent this;

>   but we can't stop it. How does the user recover from this situation? Are there any side-effects?

Reviewer: I don't foresee that this is really an issue. AppStudio will have to fall back on Snapshot consistency checks to ensure that all _necessary_ references within the snapshot are up to date. If the images are merged out of order and the image digests from the latest PR are reused, then the snapshot will be in sync quickly. Worst case (i.e. if merge commits are created), Renovatebot will eventually come around and update the references but this _should_ "just work" as the two produced containers should be functionally identical.

* A user team just has **two components that depend on each other in a functional way**. When they propose an update to one component, they want to submit a corresponding change to the second component, and have those tested together before merging both.
  * In this case, on any given day, component B’s PRs may or may not have dependencies on PRs from component A. Not all changes are linked.
  * This is a many-to-many dependency. The user may have lots of components that depend on lots of other components.

In theory **any combination of the cases above** could be present in an app. They could have one common parent image, many operand images that depend on that, and one or more operator bundles which depend on those.

Today, users work around how complicated it is to manage digests themselves by instead using *floating tags*, which have the benefit of being easy to use - no need to update - but have the problem of being unclear. It's not exactly clear what you're building against if you refer to it by tag. Potentially insecure. We want to make it easy for users to do better.

## Decision

### Interface changes

> **Declared Reference Embeddings**: Introduce a new CustomResource called `ComponentEmbedding` that lets one Component declare that another Component **embeds a reference** to it.

Reviewer 4: Would this work across namespaces? Would it make sense that it does? If yes, then where would the CR leave? In the namespace of the child, the namespace of the parent, or both (as a handshake mechanism)? If no, then maybe the limitation should be documented so it is clearly out of scope.

Author: Updated in 3c7ee39.

> * A `ComponentEmbedding` spec contains two fields: a embedded component, and a embedding component

Reviewer 4: Can we explicitly say that both those fields should be a list to simplify configuration?

We need a one-to-many for parent images, and many-to-one for bundles.

Author: Oh - I guess I thought that they would be scalar references, not lists. I.e., if you have Component A that embeds a reference to Component B that embeds a reference to Component C, you would have 3 Components and 2 ComponentEmbeddings. One ComponentEmbedding for A->B and another ComponentEmbedding for B->C.

Author: Ack. Just to clarify, the proposal as it is written in light of your common image (Component A) used by 3 other components (B, C, D), would look like 4 Components and 3 ComponentEmbeddings, one for B->A, one for C->A, and one for D->A.

Reviewer 4: Correct. In my opinion the list provides a better view of what's happening.

However I could see a UI building a graph to show the dependencies relations to the user, and buttons to add/delete relationships between components. At that point how the data is stored would not be very relevant anymore, especially if the user is not expected to interact with CRs directly to update them. It might be easier to deal with while troubleshooting though?

Author: Yeah - I think both models can and will work. I hesitate to dictate that one should be the true way here in the ADR. If we say that ComponentEmbedding is owned by 'build-service` or `application-service` (and should be defined in the redhat-appstudio/application-api repo), then perhaps we should defer to the implementing team to decide which model to implement.

Reviewer 4: Agreed. We can close this thread.

Author: @Roming22 after consulting with the HAS team, I ended up making a change similar to but different from what you proposed in 40581df6bb0e046989b90eb43236c8716e1253e3.

  configuration files](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/)? Does that still make
  sense if renovatebot is not being run on a cron basis? (If the answer to the original question is
  yes, then that may inform whether how we implement the new functionality in [build-service].
* Since we don't have exclusive control over merging changes (or really, any control at all
  exclusive or not), we can't prevent the user from merging things out of order. This means they can
  get themselves into trouble. We try to provide feedback via github checks to help prevent this;
  but we can't stop it. How does the user recover from this situation? Are there any side-effects?

## Consequences

* The basics of AppStudio builds are unchanged with this design (an alternative design that we considered involved changing the way pull-request build pipelines were defined and processed by PaC). This means less change spidering out to other AppStudio systems to support this change.
* The user can pin their digest references in git. AppStudio will automate maintaining them. No magical resolution of tags in the buildsystem at build time, or worse at runtime.

> * The user is going to get more PRs on their repo. Maybe too many PRs.

Reviewer 4: More PRs does not look good with the current state of RHTAP, if they trigger PLR that will run in parallel.

The current quotas on PVC is limiting how many PLRs can be run at any one time (12 as of today). There are already users being impacted and complaining about this.

Author: Ack. Will add this text to the consequences section.
